docs/demonstration.md, before:

---
hide:
    - navigation
---

# Demonstration

Now, we know that **Discobase**'s main functionality is just a database for storing data: we're allowing developers to access this 'database' to make their own applications.

Single quotes are applied around the term database because the database is actually the Discord server created by the user, making **Discobase** the intermediary to couple this connection.

If we look at the scenairo below, a developer&mdash;from our team&mdash;has programmed a message bookmarking bot that uses the Discord context menu feature `App -> Bookmark` to store away the message onto the database.

![demo_bot](assets/demo_bot.gif)

After storing away our pertinent message to the database, we can use a slash command as per the developer's generous design to get all the bookmarks we've stored away.

If you want to try this for yourself, you can [invite the bookmark bot](https://discord.com/oauth2/authorize?client_id=1268247436699238542&permissions=8&integration_type=0&scope=bot) to your server.

Commit message:

Switch to mdash from -- and update the demonstration section.

docs/demonstration.md, after:

---
hide:
    - navigation
---

# Demonstration

Now, we know that Discobase's main functionality is just a database for storing data: we're allowing developers to access this "database" to make their own applications.

Quotes are applied around the term database because, as mentioned earlier, the database is actually a Discord server created by the user (or by the Discobase bot in many cases), making Discobase the intermediary to couple this connection.

If we look at the scenairo below, a developer&mdash;from our team&mdash;has programmed a message bookmarking bot that uses the Discord context menu feature `App -> Bookmark` to store away the message onto the database.

![demo_bot](assets/demo_bot.gif)

This bot doesn't use any other database&mdash;no SQL, no MongoDB, nothing! Just our very own library, which stores it on a Discord server.

After storing away our pertinent message to the database, we can use a slash command as per the developer's generous design to get all the bookmarks we've stored away.

If you want to try this for yourself, you can [invite the bookmark bot](https://discord.com/oauth2/authorize?client_id=1268247436699238542&permissions=8&integration_type=0&scope=bot) to your server.
