docs/discord_interface.md, before:

---
hide:
    - navigation
---

# Discord Interface
A handful of essential commands are readily available for interacting with the Discobase discord bot.

!!! note

    The commands shown in the example section will generally have a interface provided by Discord.
    In these examples, we use a **Games** table which has the columns: **Title** and **Genre**.

## Access the Table's Schema
Checkout the data type for the columns in your table before performing `insert` or `update` operations.

The `/schema` operation takes in the name of your table as input and outputs information such as the names of columns and their datatypes you have set them to.

### Example
`/schema Games`

![schema](assets/schema_cmd.gif)

### Limitation
Considering the limit of fields is 25 on discord. The command can only show up to 25 columns, so we'll signify the limit as `field_length = 25` forming the following inequality:

**C** <= `field_length` where **C** is the number of columns.

## Update a Column's Value
Users can modify the arbitrary value they have set to a specific column in their data; however, the data type has to be consistent with the column's data type.

The `/update` slash command takes the following parameters: the name of the table, the name of the column, the old value, and the new value that should replace the old one.

### Example
`/update Games name Hit Man Absolution Tomb Raider`

![update](assets/update_cmd.gif)

### Limitation
The user is disallowed from entering a new value that is not consistent with the predefined column's data type.

## Retrieve Statistics Concerning your Database
Knowing pertinent information such as how many tables are in my database and what are the names of each table are easily answered using this command.

`/tablestats` iterates over your database's tables to display the names you've assigned to them and it tallies up a count of how many you've made.

### Example
`/tablestats`

![table_stats](assets/tablestats_cmd.gif)

### Limitation
There are no limitations for this command.

## Perform a Search on your Data
Finding information in your data is an essential task.

The slash command `/find`will ask for the following information before performing a search such as the name of the table, the name of the column, and the value you want to look up.

### Example
`/find Games name Batman`

![find_cmd](assets/find_cmd.gif)

### Limitation
The `description` field in a rich embed is limited to `4096` characters.

## Inserting a New Record Into Your Table
The `/insert` command allows you to add data to your table directly from your discord database server, saving you from having to restart your bot to add additional records.
### Usage: `/insert [table] [record]`
- **Table:** The table you want to insert a new record into.
- **Record:** The record you want to insert, formatted as a json. Use the columns as keys, and record data as values.
### Example: `/insert User {"username": "Foo", "password": "Bar"}`
![insert_cmd](assets/insert_cmd.gif)

## Deleting a Record From Your Table
The `/delete` command allows you to delete a record from your table within your Discord database server. Just like `/insert`, it saves you from having to restart your bot just to delete a record.
### Usage: `/delete [table] [record]`
- **Table:** The table you want to delete a record from.
- **Record:** The record you want to delete, formatted as a json. Use the columns as keys, and record data as values.
### Example: `/delete User {"username": "Skye", "password": "Py"}`
![delete_cmd](assets/delete_cmd.gif)

## Resetting Your Database
Ever had a large database that you simply do not know what to do with anymore? The `/reset` command makes it easy to remove all records and tables from your database and start fresh within a couple seconds! No need to make a whole new database server.
### Usage: `/reset`
![reset_cmd](assets/reset_cmd.gif)

## Viewing a Table

The `/table` command displays a table in a nicely formatted rich embed, with the columns as field titles, and the records from those columns as the field descriptions. The data is numbered so that you can easily correlate each record with its group.
### Usage: `/table [name]`
- **Name:** Name of the table.
### Example: `/table User`
![table_cmd](assets/table_cmd.gif)

## Viewing a Column

The `/column` command displays a column from a page in a neat, paginated rich embed to visualize the column data.
### Usage: `/column [table] [name]`
- **Table:** The table the column belongs to.
- **Name:** Name of the column.
### Example: `/column User password`
![column_cmd](assets/column_cmd.gif)

Commit message:

Add usage section for schema

docs/discord_interface.md, after:

---
hide:
    - navigation
---

# Discord Interface
A handful of essential commands are readily available for interacting with the Discobase discord bot.

!!! note

    The commands shown in the example section will generally have a interface provided by Discord.
    In these examples, we use a **Games** table which has the columns: **Title** and **Genre**.

## Access the Table's Schema
Checkout the data type for the columns in your table before performing `insert` or `update` operations.

The `/schema` operation takes in the name of your table as input and outputs information such as the names of columns and their datatypes you have set them to.

### Usage
`/schema [table]`
- **Table:** The name of the table you've created.

### Example
`/schema Games`

![schema](assets/schema_cmd.gif)

### Limitation
Considering the limit of fields is 25 on discord. The command can only show up to 25 columns, so we'll signify the limit as `field_length = 25` forming the following inequality:

**C** <= `field_length` where **C** is the number of columns.

## Update a Column's Value
Users can modify the arbitrary value they have set to a specific column in their data; however, the data type has to be consistent with the column's data type.

The `/update` slash command takes the following parameters: the name of the table, the name of the column, the old value, and the new value that should replace the old one.

### Example
`/update Games name Hit Man Absolution Tomb Raider`

![update](assets/update_cmd.gif)

### Limitation
The user is disallowed from entering a new value that is not consistent with the predefined column's data type.

## Retrieve Statistics Concerning your Database
Knowing pertinent information such as how many tables are in my database and what are the names of each table are easily answered using this command.

`/tablestats` iterates over your database's tables to display the names you've assigned to them and it tallies up a count of how many you've made.

### Example
`/tablestats`

![table_stats](assets/tablestats_cmd.gif)

### Limitation
There are no limitations for this command.

## Perform a Search on your Data
Finding information in your data is an essential task.

The slash command `/find`will ask for the following information before performing a search such as the name of the table, the name of the column, and the value you want to look up.

### Example
`/find Games name Batman`

![find_cmd](assets/find_cmd.gif)

### Limitation
The `description` field in a rich embed is limited to `4096` characters.

## Inserting a New Record Into Your Table
The `/insert` command allows you to add data to your table directly from your discord database server, saving you from having to restart your bot to add additional records.
### Usage: `/insert [table] [record]`
- **Table:** The table you want to insert a new record into.
- **Record:** The record you want to insert, formatted as a json. Use the columns as keys, and record data as values.
### Example: `/insert User {"username": "Foo", "password": "Bar"}`
![insert_cmd](assets/insert_cmd.gif)

## Deleting a Record From Your Table
The `/delete` command allows you to delete a record from your table within your Discord database server. Just like `/insert`, it saves you from having to restart your bot just to delete a record.
### Usage: `/delete [table] [record]`
- **Table:** The table you want to delete a record from.
- **Record:** The record you want to delete, formatted as a json. Use the columns as keys, and record data as values.
### Example: `/delete User {"username": "Skye", "password": "Py"}`
![delete_cmd](assets/delete_cmd.gif)

## Resetting Your Database
Ever had a large database that you simply do not know what to do with anymore? The `/reset` command makes it easy to remove all records and tables from your database and start fresh within a couple seconds! No need to make a whole new database server.
### Usage: `/reset`
![reset_cmd](assets/reset_cmd.gif)

## Viewing a Table

The `/table` command displays a table in a nicely formatted rich embed, with the columns as field titles, and the records from those columns as the field descriptions. The data is numbered so that you can easily correlate each record with its group.
### Usage: `/table [name]`
- **Name:** Name of the table.
### Example: `/table User`
![table_cmd](assets/table_cmd.gif)

## Viewing a Column

The `/column` command displays a column from a page in a neat, paginated rich embed to visualize the column data.
### Usage: `/column [table] [name]`
- **Table:** The table the column belongs to.
- **Name:** Name of the column.
### Example: `/column User password`
![column_cmd](assets/column_cmd.gif)
